Oh, one of the blessings of this week is having our missionaries with us.
And as Mother Morris mentioned, we have Eric and Tres Hartman.
And they're serving in a Navajo field in Shiprock, New Mexico.
So thank you for taking some time to allow us to get to know you.
Maybe you could just kind of start off with where you're from, how you came in the truth.
Okay.
Was baptized when I was 17, raised in the truth in Spokane, Washington?
And I'm from Sedona, Arizona originally also raised in the truth.
And a pioneer sister studied with me and I was baptized when I was 14.
Very nice. Good.
As was mentioned to you serving with a Navajo field.
And when that was mentioned, everyone went, oh, we're anxious to kind of hear a little bit about that.
But how did you end up on the reservation?
When I was 18, I was looking for somewhere to go and something to do.
And the circuit overseer had asked two families from my congregation to move to Chimley, Arizona
on the reservation to form the fourth congregation there.
They moved and I visited them and two months later I moved as well.
And Tres and I met in Sedona, Arizona.
I was in my first year of pioneering and it was before she moved to the reservation.
And then I came to Brooklyn Bethel and then later,
Wal-Kill and then I left Wal-Kill in 2000 and then we were married in 2001.
Good. Nice.
So then, let's see, I understand you started full-time service around 94.
I think Tres was 97.
Then you went through the 131st class of Gilead and graduated in 2011.
I know that was a nice experience.
What sparked your interest in missionary service?
Well, for me, when we were in the Navajo field, the territory there was so much work to do.
And we really came to love the field.
And we invested a lot of effort into the language and it's not a language that you can use anywhere else.
So the more invested we became in the territory, the harder it was to think about leaving it.
But we had some friends that were missionaries and they encouraged us to put our trust in Jehovah and reach out.
And for me, I loved the field so much.
But because Eric had been in special full-time service previously,
he knew what it was to give everything to Jehovah all of your time.
And it's very hard to make a living on the reservation as a non-native, especially.
And so if we could give Jehovah everything, we knew we could accomplish so much more.
So it took some convincing, even for Gilead, for me to leave this field.
But when we were accepted, we were thrilled.
Yeah, well, you know, you say it took some convincing to leave the field.
Because you loved it so much, both of you.
But now you go through Gilead and then you get this assignment to the United States.
What was your reaction to that?
Well, honestly, when the instructors handed us our letter,
I was just looking for where our assignment was and what we were going to be doing.
And when I saw a missionary serving in the Navajo field,
we both burst into tears.
And our instructors asked right away, are you happy?
Obviously, we were very happy.
We didn't even know it was possible to be assigned as missionaries in the US.
But it has helped us so much and it has helped the field so much.
It's been a wonderful gift.
Very nice.
Good.
So Eric, you just think back to those lessons in Gilead.
And then you're in your assignment now.
Make the connection between what you learned and how you're applying it in your missionary service.
One of the lessons we're encouraged with was to work ourselves out of a job.
And so we've really tried to focus our attention on
involving the Navajo brothers and sisters in the work.
And what that's done is it's really helped them to rely on Jehovah and not merely on us.
And it really creates stability within the field.
So even as we think about that advice,
it's really proving helpful as things move forward.
For me, a catchphrase from Gilead that sticks with me is to shovel the coal.
Meaning we are not on deck with the captain.
We are in the bowels of the ship.
And our job is the grant labor.
And it's not up to us to ask or question why the captain says to do one thing or another.
For me, that's been very helpful personally,
because so much has changed in our field in three years.
I wish that it had happened 30 years ago, but it didn't.
And so it's not my job to say why not?
It's my job to shovel the coal.
Trust the captain and just keep doing my work so we can go full steam ahead.
Those are good lessons, aren't they?
So as was mentioned, you're working in Shiprock.
You're working with the Navajo.
What is that like?
What's the reservation like?
What's it like working in the ministry among those the Navajo people?
Well, the Navajo reservation is a vast area.
It covers parts of New Mexico, Arizona, and Utah.
27,000 square miles.
There's 300,000 Navajo people on the reservation,
and about 75% speak Navajo at home.
Amazing.
And Navajo people, people, most when they first meet them,
think, oh, they're so shy or so deadpan, they only are with strangers or with outsiders.
But once you get to know them, they just open up and they love to laugh and to tease.
They're so much fun.
And the language really helps open up that part of their personality.
It's nice.
How long has the work been going on there in that area?
Well, the preaching work has really been building momentum for decades.
In the 70s, the first English congregation was established in Tupaciti, Arizona.
And now there's six congregations on the reservation and 13 around the borders.
Interesting.
And then for the first Navajo witness that we know of that was baptized,
was in the 1950s, off reservation.
But the work has progressed, and now there's between two to 300 Navajo brothers and sisters.
Good.
So how has the work changed?
How has the preaching work changed over the years?
I've been there 18 years now, and it has changed tremendously.
You can't even recognize it from the way it used to be.
At first, everything was in English, all the meetings, most of the ministry.
We had a few, if any, Navajo publications available.
But now we have an RTO that supplies us with wonderful literature that we use constantly.
And using the language in the more, more in the field has transformed everything.
And when I arrived on the res in 2000, same thing, all the congregations were in English.
The preaching work was basically in English, except the Navajo publishers.
And so at this point, you really see even with the two branch language classes in 2001 and 2003,
because of the difficulty of the language, it was hard for the pioneers to take it to the field, even afterwards.
But now it's really beginning to change.
Good.
All right, so there was growth in the beginning, slow.
But what has helped to speed up the growth?
Well, the words of Isaiah 60 and verse 22 have really proved to be true.
I myself Jehovah shall speed it up in its own time.
And he uses his organization to shift obstacles that before seemed impossible to move.
One of the things that's really, really helped us is in the past, probably two years,
we've received so many couples from the couple school.
And that we went from having five special pioneers in the field to having 25 in the field.
And it really, it strengthens the congregations.
It helps the other need graders there see the importance of learning the language and using it.
And it just gives that stability.
But for the Navajo friends, it really makes them feel special and feel like they really are at home in Jehovah's organization.
Yeah, and I think we received four more couples this past weekend, one for the Hopi language.
Over the past three years, that shift towards the Navajo language has really helped the Navajo brothers and sisters.
Now there's four Navajo congregations, seven groups and two pre-groups.
And all of that is a huge help in stabilizing the faith of the brothers.
Very good, very nice.
So it's nice and encouraging to see what's taking place there.
One of the things that Trez mentioned earlier was increase has taken place because they're hearing the truth and the language of their heart.
Can you, can you, do you have an experience that illustrates that point?
This illustration really shows how much the publications affect the hearts of people.
One sister in our congregation, she was out in the ministry, had a nice call, placed a list in the God brochure in Navajo.
And she wrote down the information, but then when she went home, her granddaughter got into her service bag and tore out that page.
And our sister has tons of calls.
So for her to know that she was missing this woman, it didn't happen.
But meanwhile, that woman was reading the publications.
And she started to realize that her involvement with the peyote religion was wrong and Jehovah was not pleased with it.
And so in time, as she thought about that, she began to realize that she needed to get rid of the peyote music.
She even took her son's teepee and burned it in the fire.
You have to realize this woman hadn't even had a study.
She's just reading it and coming to know Jehovah through the publications.
Now, at this point, our sister still doesn't know that this woman is out there.
So our sister is working at a public witnessing cart in a flea market in the town we live in.
And all of a sudden, this Navajo woman calls out, she says, this is it.
This is the truth.
She's yelling to her son because she had seen the list in the God brochure on the cart.
And so now she can have a study and the publication.
Isn't that something very nice?
Thank you, Eric, for sharing that.
So I understand that on October 25th, you had the first Navajo assembly.
What was that like, Eric?
It was absolutely amazing.
Partially because there was people from tribes all over Canada, the Americas, even Mexico,
just to name a few Navajo, Hopi, Zuni, Laguna, Akima, Wallapai, Apache, the Neh, Ojibwa, Cherokee,
Kree, Kayawa, Kikapoo, Spokane, Blackfoot, it keeps going.
One count, there was people from 24 states and 26 tribes represented at the assembly.
And we also had Native Americans from three different countries, like we mentioned in
US, Canada, and Mexico.
Even the young ones really enjoyed the program.
And we had Brother Bro from the branch committee there for the occasion.
There was 1333 in attendance.
And this was the first time that many of the Navajo brothers and sisters had heard a program
almost entirely in Navajo.
In fact, one of the Bible students in the middle of the assembly just set out loud.
This is such a great program.
I'm learning so much.
That's nice.
It was really reaching the heart.
What about that 83-year-old sister?
We had one sister baptize a Masana, as they call it, grandmother's.
She was 83.
Her name was Rose Sennagini, and she had been studying off and on in English only since
the 1970s, without making much progress.
So finally, one of our special Pioneer brothers from the B.S.C.C. took matters in his hands
and he said, she needs to study in Navajo.
And we do not have the Bible Teachbook or the God's Lovebook in Navajo.
And both the study and the sister assigned to study with her were both learning how to
read their language.
So she had to translate, as she went on the study, they would work through the scriptures
together and they would high-five each other when they figured out the scripture.
And in that way, she was able to progress to baptism in just a year and a half.
And it was an exciting event to have her baptized.
Very nice.
That's exciting.
Very good experience has taken place there, and we appreciate that.
How has your missionary service increased your faith, strengthened your faith, and strengthened
your love for Jehovah?
Well for me, this assignment has really shown me that Jehovah knows me.
He knows who I am, and he knows what I love.
But he also knows the needs of the field.
And when he can put those two things together, it's a wonderful thing.
And so when I face challenges in my assignment, I remember that.
Jehovah knows me.
He knows what I love, and he knows the field, and put that together and beautiful things
happen.
What about you, Eric?
For me, early on one brother at Bethel said that no one brother here at Bethel knows
what the next step needs to be.
But Jehovah does.
And seeing that has really built my confidence because the amount of work and the obstacles
that need to be overcome are huge.
But Jehovah's ability to do that, just like the scripture said, he's speeding it up in
his own time.
That's true.
Well, you know, I know we could go on and on, we've shared a lot.
And we've been very encouraged by your comments.
So we thank you for your service.
We thank the other missionaries for their fine service.
And we prayed Jehovah's blessings will be with you and them as you continue faithfully
serving Jehovah in your assignments.
All to his praise and glory.
Thank you very much.